[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisenthal.
>> Joe, I kind of missed this on Friday
because I was not feeling very well. So
I I was out sick. But uh what was Friday
morning like when you were sat in front
of your Bloomberg terminal?
>> Well, the jobs report was pretty uh
shocking. Obvious Friday was just a
crazy day. I mean so the jobs report
obviously was it was it was bad. I mean
the last two months massively revised
down. All of this evidence of labor
market momentum perhaps seems to be
stalling. The tariff effect maybe we
really are and it's sort of some sort of
tariff induced slowdown. The only job
creation is in healthcare and social
service. Not great,
>> right? Okay. So, I saw the initial jobs
report headlines. So, we had non-farm
payrolls coming in at plus 73,000, which
I think was like 30% lower than the
average expectation. We had the
unemployment rate ticking up to like
4.3%
>> 4.2
>> 4 almost 4.3%.
>> Oh. Oh, let me let me Sorry.
>> I'm rounding up here.
>> Okay. Okay. Okay. Although maybe I
shouldn't do that on a podcast all about
labor market statistics. But the big
thing that seemed to catch everyone's
attention was we also had these massive
revisions to the report for May and
June. So we had a combined 258,000
jobs basically lowered from the initial
reports. And this was like the biggest
revision since the depths of the
pandemic. And then the headline that
really caught my eye while I was, you
know, laying in my sick bed on Friday
afternoon was Trump firing the head of
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. So the
agency responsible for putting out the
non-farm payroll report every month.
>> Yeah, this is um I would say the key
thing is that a we've been used to these
uh you know seeing significant
revisions. We've been talking, you in
particular have been writing a lot in
the newsletter about deteriorating
quality of labor statistics. Response
rates to a lot of surveys have gone down
over time. Kind of like we're seeing in
political opinion surveys and so forth.
So there's already been this sort of
anxiety. You have a lot of people
online, including President Trump
himself, you know, been like stoking
sort of these conspiracy theories about
these revisions, these attempts to
actually be transparent. And then you
get the first sort of like genuinely
negative report under this
administration. It's the first one that
was like, "Okay, this was bad." And
boom, Trump fires uh the person
responsible for it. Now, again, this is
one of those things where sort of like
Doge itself where it's like, I like the
idea of government efficiency, right?
Yeah, sure. Doge, I like the idea of the
BLS sort of doing a better job in some
way or addressing these responses, but
like Doge, which you know, we all have
seen how that's turned out. I think
there are a lot of more than a lot of
questions more than a lot of questions
about whether firing the BLS and
replacing the head with someone who's uh
you know a Trump appointee will uh you
know add a more credible transparent
data quality.
>> Right. One thing that we have learned
from all our episodes on data collection
in the US is that it is actually a
really really insanely laborintensive
thing to do. you have to actually call
up a bunch of people, um, homeowners for
instance, or you have to call up a bunch
of businesses and ask questions. You
have to go out into the field and gather
individual prices. And we can have a
debate over whether or not you could
maybe use new technology, price scanning
data to make all of that more efficient.
But for the time being, that's how it's
done. And so, you need people to do it.
And if Doge comes in and eliminates, you
know, a big chunk of the budget, then it
becomes harder to do. or if it just gets
more costly and the budget's gone up.
And then the one thing I would say is
that in our conversations and again you
have talked to the BLS many times they
are really good. They are professionals
and they take it very seriously.
>> They are very responsive. However,
>> very transparent.
>> We could talk about this a little bit
but perhaps less responsive than they
used to be in recent weeks. So anyway,
we should talk about all of this. I
think it's really important and as you
said there are big questions like what
happens if a president ousts a BLS chief
and then introduces a new one. We have
the perfect guest someone we've spoken
to before about the decline of America's
data infrastructure. We're going to be
speaking with Bill Beachch. He is of
course the former commissioner of labor
statistics, former head of the BLS. So
Bill, thank you so much for coming back
on All Thoughts.
>> Yeah, it's just just really a pleasure
to be back with you. I wish we uh were
talking about some other subject besides
this termination. I mean, it's just
really
>> shock. Well, on that note, Friday uh
Trump tweets or posts that he wants to
fire Erica McNurfer, the commissioner of
labor statistics. What was going through
your mind when you saw that news?
>> I was dumbass. I just finished a lunchon
meeting at a very nice restaurant and I
was sitting in my pickup truck and I
just couldn't believe and then I sat
there for probably 30 40 minutes car
running and answering emails people just
sorting it out. It isn't that he didn't
have the authority to do so. He does
have the authority and we all, you know,
everyone in the executive branch serves
at the pleasure of the president except
those that have been specifically
exempted by statute and and where that
statute's been signed by the president.
I think what was shocking about this is
not that she was dismissed. That's
shocking enough. It was the possibility
that we could have now a sustained
attack on official economic statistics
and that would undermine confidence in
those statistics and put us in a path
that other countries have followed. I
mean instantly people went to worst
case. After a while that sort of settled
down and we began to look at the reasons
for for the dismissal which I then
subsequently said on Twitter or X that
were they were they were unfounded and I
haven't dropped that that position
since. So happy to talk about it.
>> Well, why don't we just back up for a
second? We talked to you before cuz
you've been sounding the alarm about the
capacity constraints to collect good
data. But just for people who haven't
listened to or haven't followed you, you
were a Trump appointee. I mean, you
served at the head of the BLS in 2017.
And so I do, you know, and so like,
okay, your credibility, why don't you
just give us a little bit of background
about who you are, your position, and
the concerns that you've been raising
for some time about the constraints at
the BLS? So, I was uh I was really
honored to be the commissioner of labor
statistics from 2019 until 2023. So, I
served a little less than two years
under President Trump. He nominated me.
It is a presidential nomination, Senate
confirmed positions. It has a statutory
four-year term. And then I served the
rest of my term under President Biden.
So, I I was in both terms. I I think
that's kind of important because the BLS
commissioner has been exempt from the
normal turning over of the presidency by
party and that's because the view is
well these data are so important they
should not even be a part of the
political appointment process except
when they come due sort of like u you
know the Federal Reserve chair or
something of that nature. It's just seen
as we want to keep it out of politics.
So I I served over that period of time.
You know, that was the COVID period. So
there were all kinds of real challenges
from that. But I think the main thing
that I drew from that period is how
important it is crucial almost at a
crisis level to modernize the way we
collect data. The response rates on the
surveys are falling dramatically. I've
made that point on this program. and our
costs are rising dramatically which
makes it really difficult to conduct
those surveys in the future in the way
we have in the past and then the future
is a kind of a going in the direction of
the employment survey and I just said
surveys are are are following but the
employment survey is a little different
it's not an in-person survey it is an
electronic survey and we need to invest
more in the electronic side of
statistical creation or production
blended data etc I could do a program on
this, but your your point was well made.
BLS has had some challenges in front of
it, as has the entire statistical
system. Unfortunately, for this
particular episode, those challenges
were really not I don't say relevant.
They they're relevant, of course, but
they're really not the reason why we
should have had a a change at the top. H
well speaking of the employment report
talk to us about what exactly happens
when the BLS is publishing the initial
non-farm payrolls and then what happens
you know in the couple months or so
before it publishes the revision and why
does it seem we are getting these large
gaps at least in recent months and years
>> right so the employment survey the jobs
numbers come from a survey of businesses
uh the unemployment rate comes from a
survey of households. So there's two
surveys involved in every first Friday
report. What we're talking about now is
the survey that goes out to businesses
and it goes out to hundreds of thousands
of businesses. Well, of course there
still a probability sample since there's
well in excess of 12 million businesses
in our census of business, our business
register. Well, those businesses are
supposed to turn their surveys in at the
end of the month basically, but only
about 68% usually that's the average do
so. And so BLS keeps the window open for
two more months. So 68% or so at the end
of the first month they make the first
estimate. Then at the end of the second
month, we've get about 83%
completion and they revise that number
of the first month. And then by the
third month we're into the 90s. Usually
end up around 93 94% of all the sent out
returns come back to us with
information. So it's a wonderful survey.
The revisions are done because we get
more information from businesses. Often
times big businesses answer first. They
have the capacity to do so and then we
get smaller entities, state and local
governments. Smaller businesses answer
in those next two months. We always have
revisions. There's there's I can't I
can't imag even when it when we say the
number did not change it doesn't mean we
we didn't have revisions they just
canceled each other out. There's just
all these revisions are coming in. The
revisions have been uh high recently but
this is not atypical of a period when
the economy is either going back to
growth or going down to subsidance. So
often times turning points in the
economy are accompanied by changes
larger changes in the revisions
particularly in this case where we
suspect smaller businesses are feeling
the effects of the supply shock coming
from the tariff policy and from
immigration and that these supply shocks
are affecting smaller businesses more
than they are larger businesses and
state and local governments are being
affected by yet another factor and that
is the expiration of the co era money. I
think that's was actually the root of a
lot of the changes that you saw on
Friday. State and local governments are
not able to to hire at the levels they
were going to hire at in previous years
or did hire at in previous years because
they did not have the subsidies that
they had in previous years. So, these
are important revisions. Actually, the
research shows, and this may shock you,
that BLS is getting much better at its
first estimate than it was 30 years ago.
In fact, it's really kind of almost a a
steady progress towards greater
accuracy. So, the big revisions are
indicative of not air, they're
indicative of more information. And the
bigger the revisions, the more likely we
are in a turning point. There's so much
that was in that answer that I found to
be very helpful and clarifying. So,
thank you. I mean, just this idea, you
know, a that actually over time,
contrary to what people on Twitter might
think, that the quality of that first
pass has actually gone up is uh um is
very striking. You know, let's stipulate
that. Okay, the BLS could use some
upgrading as you mentioned that there
are these capacity constraints,
non-response, the cost of going out,
maybe it needs to adopt more technology
in some way to solve for this. Does the
BLS currently have that capacity either
budgetarywise or statutory authority
such that a commissioner could just do
that whatever it is that ideal state or
would it need either some sort of
budgetary allocation or an act of
Congress to get to the point where it's
you know getting to the level that we
are happy with again
>> it has the authority to make the changes
it doesn't have the budget to do so and
it isn't that BLS just needs more money
I matter of fact I think Congress if it
paid more attention would say well what
are you spending your money on now and
let's make sure that the low priority is
cancelled so that we can support the
high priority I think BLS would be very
happy with that but we do need more
money and why well if you're going to
change an official statistic the
unemployment rate let's just take that
you want to be really careful right you
want to run tests you want to test out
your new idea you don't want to have a
you
count the number of geese in the air and
that's the unemployment rate. You want
to make sure that that is a particularly
good indicator of the employment market
and you want to test it in real time as
well as experimental time in real time.
So run it parallel. Well, the these
these tests expand the costs of your
unemployment statistics program because
you're running essentially two systems
simultaneously.
We think that to modify the current
population survey, which is the survey
of households, would cost around 15
million to 20 million in experimental
costs over a 2-year period. It's not
great. The program itself costs about 45
million a year,
>> but it does add to the cost for those
two years or so. Congress could could
easily do that. I mean, oh my gosh,
Congress is spending a lot more money
than that on things that we might
disagree with, but they need to allocate
a little bit of money to CPS for that.
Does it have the authority? Here's a
really interesting story. During COVID,
we canled all travel, all conferences,
you know, was and I was surprised at how
many millions of dollars went into
travel and conferences and meetings. So,
this became for me couch money during
the co years. And I was able to spend
that money um you know on on important
things I thought. So I did a lot of
things like I built a new data center to
get us out of the basement of a 104 year
old building
>> and out to a wonderful above ground
local location but I also started a
number of research programs and I made
31 big modifications to the to the CPI.
We started a whole new approach on on
looking at consumer expenditures and I
subsidized some experimentation on the
jobs report. Well, as soon as CO was
over, we started to get congressionally
mandated programs that then sucked up
all that couch money. If we had a little
bit of extra, we I mean BLS, a little
bit of extra to do these these things,
just just think of the innovation that
that would happen. I think we would
quickly be out of the problems that we
are facing from a methodological
standpoint. And that might then reduce
the political pressure that we saw that
was so evident on Friday.
>> So, we are recording this August 4th,
9:25 a.m. in the morning and 33 seconds.
I feel like I need to be that specific
nowadays with the news flow. Uh, so who
knows what happens between now and when
this episode actually comes out, but we
are expecting the administration to
announce a new BLS head in the coming
days. What happens now? You know, if
there's a Trump appointee for a new
statistics commissioner after the
president has specifically stated that
he thinks the previous commissioner was
politically motivated in some way, are
people still going to believe the
numbers that are coming out? And how do
you think that's actually going to play
internally at the BLS at an organization
whose whole, you know, raise on Dutch is
to find, you know, factual numbers and
statistics to portray the American
economy?
>> Well, I think there has been damage and
it will take time to recover from that
damage. The last time there was a
serious political effort on BLS was
during the Nixon administration and um
it took some time for BLS to recover
from that though the action taken by the
president at that time visav BLS was not
I think as as significant as this one.
So you just imagine that the president
decides to no appointment St. Peter you
know as the new BLS commissioner and of
course St. Peter has a reputation for
honesty and for clarity of thought.
Still, it'll be the case because St.
Peter won't have any control over the
way that the data are collected or the
data are assembled or the estimates that
are done. That's all done outside of the
of the knowledge of the commissioner.
Commissioner has no control over that.
In fact, you're locked out of that whole
process. So, it will be the case that
St. Peter will have a month come when
the unemployment rate will be
disappointingly low, could even be
negative. But I think given what has
just happened, people will say, well,
St. Peter probably influenced that
number and it's not as bad as it really
is. So for a while, that suspicion that
the estimate that's announced is really
not the real estimate will be in the
minds of some people. Not in my mind
because I know that these people who
work there, the professionals, the
full-time staff, the patriots that that
work there, the the the loyal Americans
who are just extremely diligent in doing
an absolutely objective job, those
people are still in place. But if you
don't have my level of knowledge or a
reasonable level of knowledge of how
internally BLS works, you're going to be
subject to these falsehoods and
accusations and that will be damaging.
that will reduce investment that will
reduce economic activity that will make
at at least that will create greater
uncertainty about what's happening
inside the US economy policy makers will
be less less clear in the direction that
they take so that there will be a time
when we need to recover no matter who's
appointed I hope that it will be a
short-lived time and my guess is given
the reputation of BLS if someone you
know really reputable is appointed then
yeah I don't I think the period of
transition will be that long.
>> All right. Well, Bill Beach, really
appreciate you coming back on the show.
Uh, thank you so much for for being on.
>> Thanks, Bill. That was great.
>> Oh, thank you very much for asking me.
[Music]
>> Joe, so good to get Bill back on to talk
about this. Really the perfect guest.
There are so many I guess ironies
involved in this whole conversation. The
big one of course is this idea that like
well if Trump wants to convince everyone
that the US economy is doing fantastic
and job growth is great then firing the
head of statistics and having everyone
distrust you know the subsequent numbers
because the subsequent head might be a
political appointee who's you know a
loyalist to Trump. It seems like you're
sort of shooting yourself in the foot.
The other huge contradiction
is that he says Powell is too late.
Right? This is the other huge
contradiction which is every day he
slams Powell. He's like, "Oh, you're too
late. You need to cut rates."
>> Well, if the job numbers were weak, then
I could understand this argument to some
extent. Oh, the job. But he's also
casting aspersions on the negative jobs
numbers. So, how is Powell too late?
There's I mean, this is it's an
irretrievable contradiction in the two
criticisms, both of the Fed and the BLS.
It's definitely a contradiction. I don't
think however that Trump necessarily
draws a direct connection between the
unemployment rate and uh interest rates
as well. You know, he seems to just like
low interest rates
>> and he seems to perceive that low
interest rates are basically a reward
for an improving economy. But yes,
>> but I mean lots of other contradictions.
You're absolutely right. So another one
is this idea that okay, a lot of the
weakness came through on the revision
side. the revisions are mostly coming
from small businesses who reply late.
And if you think about the Trump
administration, you know, they always
sort of portray themselves as a a good
business environment for smaller
businesses and it might be that that's
an area that's seeing some weakness. I
thought your question about sort of
internal morale and as Bill said, you
know, an agency staffed with patriots, I
mean, I just, you know, is BLS going to
be continue to be a destination for
people who are patriots, right? Or take
their jobs seriously in the future is a
really interesting question. Also, the
idea that like maybe we could like get
high data quality for like $20 million,
given how much that's worth, it's just
like drives you crazy if that's really
all it took. But also I really like this
idea that it would have to always be
done in parallel with the current thing
such that the new data is sort of
provably backwards compatible with the
old data right so if you're going to
adopt a new methodology you need some
allocation to run two surveys at once
etc anyway even in a very short
conversation learned a lot from Bill
>> absolutely I do think it's worth
pointing out that there are other
statistical agencies in the world that
are experimenting with new technology
for data sources the UK's statistics
agency in particular they're going start
using, you know, price scanning data for
CPI.
>> Wait, have you heard about the whole
thing though with how they moved the O
andS to Wales and no one wanted to go
out there and have you heard about this?
>> I have Wales that distribute the the
large of the government across everyone
loves that idea. Let's not have it all
be concentrated in London. They're like,
"Okay, we're going to make everyone move
to Wales and now it's a lot harder for
the ONS to hire anyone." Anyway, it's
just a little interesting story out.
Maybe we'll cover it at some point.
>> Why people don't want to move to Wales.
>> No, I just think it's interesting,
right? Like there's I intuitively I love
this idea of like or why should all of
the government spending on public sector
stuff at the federal level be in the
richest city in the UK or why should it
all be in DC etc. And so this idea of
diff anyway it's a separate thing. It's
actually some interesting challenges
arise from it.
>> Okay. Shall we leave it there?
>> Yeah, let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest
William Beach. He's at beachw453.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman Dashelbennet at Dashbot and
Kale Brooks at Kaleb Brooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about the future of
economic statistic collection in the US,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite
>> or the UK. And please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Yeah.